chore: update style guide (#1720)
canonical/operator: STYLE.md

## Docs and docstrings

### Avoid the negative, state conditions in the positive

State conditions positively: what should happen, rather than what shouldn't. Focus on desired behaviour, and frame instructions and conditions around the expected or successful outcome, not failure cases.

Example:

- Avoid: "If the command doesn’t exit within 1 second, the start is considered successful." (Negative)
- Prefer: "If the command stays running for the 1-second window, the start is considered successful." (Positive)

> Exceptions: Only use negative phrasing when:

Reviewer: Very minor - I think it's better like:

```suggestion
Only use negative phrasing when:
```

- The failure case is the primary concern (for example, error handling).
- The positive phrasing is awkward or less clear.

### Avoid passive, be active

Use the active voice as much as possible.

We should only use the passive voice when we don't know or care about who performed the action.

Example:

- Avoid: "A minimal check is created using the default values"
- Prefer: "We create a minimal check, using the default values"

### Avoid subjective, be objective

Avoid using words like "easy", "simple", or "just", which are subjective and assume the reader's skill level. Instead, describe the action directly by stating what to do and focusing on concrete steps.

Examples:

> - Avoid: "This can be done easily using ..."
> - Prefer: "You can do this using ..."
> 
> - Avoid: "This can be easily configured by ..."
> - Prefer: "We can configure this using ..."
> 
> - Avoid: "Simply run the command ..."
> - Prefer: "Run the command ..."

Reviewer: These examples work better in the source than when displayed in GitHub. In GitHub, it's not possible to distinguish the different pairs. How about this:

```suggestion
- "You can do this using ..." rather than "This can be done easily using ..."
- "This can be easily configured by ..." rather than "We can configure this using ..."
- "Simply run the command ..." rather than "Run the command ..."
```

### Be concise and avoid repetition

For example, avoid long introductions in a how-to guide or a tutorial. They might be appropriate if we were writing a blog post or a book, but not for documentation.

Trim repetitive titles: Avoid repeating the name if the surrounding content already provides context.

For example, in a document called "How to use Pebble", the section names can simply be "API", "CLI commands", and "Features", instead of "Pebble API", "Pebble CLI commands", and "Pebble features".

> ### Order: alphanumeric or logical
> 
> We can either use an alphanumeric order, or a logical order, depending on the context.
> 
> Alphanumeric order is better in the case of a reference doc or a list (for example, an Enum).

Reviewer: I'd probably go with "alphabetical" as it sounds more natural, but either works

```suggestion
### Order: alphabetical or logical

We can either use an alphabetical order, or a logical order, depending on the context.

Alphabetical order is better in the case of a reference doc or a list (for example, an Enum).
```

- `pebble rm`

Exceptions:

- If there's a strong logical progression (for example, "low", "medium", "high"; or a list of things that you should read in that particular order).
- If there is already an exception in the current documentation, follow existing conventions.

### Use British English

[Canonical's documentation style](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/) uses British spelling, which we try to follow here. For example: "colour" rather than "color", "labelled" rather than "labeled", "serialise" rather than "serialize", and so on.

It's a bit less clear when we're dealing with code and APIs, as those normally use US English, for example, `pytest.mark.parametrize`, and `color: #fff`.

### Spell out abbreviations

Abbreviations and acronyms in docstrings should usually be spelled out:

- "for example" rather than "e.g."
- "that is" rather than "i.e."
- "and so on" rather than "etc"
- "unit testing" rather than UT, and so on

However, it's okay to use acronyms that are very well known in our domain, like HTTP or JSON or RPC.

### Use sentence case in headings

`## Use sentence case for headings`, instead of `## Use Title Case for Headings`.

### Be consistent

> Choice of words: For example, if the whole document uses "mandatory", you probably shouldn't use "required" in a newly added paragraph. For another example, if the whole doc uses "list foo" when adding new content, don't use "get a list of bar".

Reviewer: Very minor, for consistency :slightly_smiling_face: 

```suggestion
Choice of words: For example, if the whole document uses "mandatory", you probably shouldn't use "required" in a newly added paragraph. For another example, if the whole document uses "list foo" when adding new content, don't use "get a list of bar".
```

Example:

- Avoid: "For reference information about the API, see [API and clients] and [API]." (It's hard to tell the difference of these two.)
- Prefer: "For an explanation of API access levels, see [API and clients]. For the full API reference, see [API reference]." (Clear)

### Don't over-promote

Avoid overstatement: Only use adjectives like "comprehensive", "powerful", or "robust" when the feature truly meets the description.

Example:

- Avoid: "Pebble provides a comprehensive health check feature"
- Prefer: "Pebble provides a health check feature"

Let features speak for themselves, describe actual capabilities and use measurable terms when possible (for example, "supports 3 types of checks" instead of "versatile checking")

Future-proofing: Qualify with "currently" when describing evolving features. For example: "Currently, the only supported log target type is Grafana Loki".

### Avoid implementation-specific terminology

Focus on behaviour, not internal implementation: Describe what it does rather than how a particular implementation works.

Example:

> - Avoid: "`Change.Err` will be non-empty if the change had an error." (Code-specific)
> - Prefer: "The `err` field in the response will contain an error message if the operation failed." (General)

Reviewer 2: I feel that the problem here is that it's essentially a tautology, rather than being code specific. I think a better example in this space would be:

```suggestion
- Avoid: "The `Change` ID will be empty when the check is stopped." (Implementation-specific.)
- Prefer: "The `Status` will be 'inactive' when the check is stopped." (General.)
```

> Exception: If documenting a client library (for example, Go/Python SDKs), implementation details are appropriate.

Reviewer 2: It does feel a bit awkward to have this here, when all three packages in this repository are essentially client libraries (or frameworks, which is essentially the same).

### Articles

Choose between the "a" or "the" articles carefully.

> - Avoid: "The format of the duration string is a sequence of decimal numbers"
> - Prefer: "The format of a duration string is a sequence of decimal numbers." (Describing a generic parameter, not a specific one.)
> 
> - Avoid: "Restart the service when the health check fails."
> - Prefer: "Restart a service when the health check fails." (When describing a generic behaviour, no specific service is implied.)

Reviewer: The different groups don't render well in GitHub. How about this:

```suggestion
When describing a generic parameter:

- Avoid: "The format of the duration string is a sequence of decimal numbers."
- Prefer: "The format of a duration string is a sequence of decimal numbers."

When describing a generic behaviour:

- Avoid: "Restart the service when the health check fails."
- Prefer: "Restart a service when the health check fails." (No specific service is implied.)
```

### Code blocks

- Consistency: the styles of code blocks and terminal output samples should be the same, at least within the same document.

> - Preferred style: Use `{code-block}` when showing files. Use `{terminal}` (`.rst` style) when showing commands or terminal output. Avoid using `{code-block}` for commands or terminal output, unless it's consistent with the existing content in the same document.

Reviewer 2: I think the intention here is to choose between `terminal` and `code-block`, but it seems like it's saying that the `{code-block}` style should always be used. We definitely don't do that now -- we have lots of triple-backtick followed by language, and I think those are generally fine, particularly for simple cases.

I think this would be better extended to cover the common cases, particularly how to format a code block in API reference code (ReST in a docstring) and in general docs (Myst-markdown, in .md files) with 2-3 small examples. Focusing particularly on Python/Go code more than shell commands (or having that as well, but definitely with Python and/or Go, maybe one YAML example).

I think we should also link to https://mystmd.org/guide/code so that it's easy to find the reference for what can be done with code blocks (outside of the docstrings).

I think we eventually want to adopt more use of pulling in code from external files (Charmcraft does a bunch of this quite effectively, I think), so we could maybe also explain that, but perhaps that's better left for another day.

Author: How about "use triple-backtick followed by language or `{code-block}`"?

Link to https://mystmd.org/guide/code added.

Reviewer: Ah thanks - the links says:

> You can use either `code` or `code-block` directive documented above or even a normal Markdown code block. All implementations in MyST are resolved to the same code type in the abstract syntax tree.

I think our default approach should be triple-backticks, as `{code-block}` messes with syntax highlighting (at least in VS Code).

Author: OK, I updated it to triple backticks, and will rerun the build.

> - Highlighting: Use `:emphasize-lines: 8-10` with `{code-block}` for highlighting lines in files when necessary. Don't add an inconsistent `{code-block}` just so that you can highlight lines in commands or terminal output. Instead, use `{terminal}` along with helpful words and comments.

Reviewer 2: I'm not particularly sold on code highlighting in short code blocks in docs. Do we really want to recommend this?

### YAML

- Use quotes for strings: This is especially important if a string contains special characters or starts with a number.

> - Indentation: Always use spaces and be consistent with the number of spaces throughout the same file (usually, this should be two or four).

Reviewer 2: I'd be in favour of us picking one (probably 2?) and going with that rather than just saying to be consistent.

```suggestion
- Indentation: Always use spaces and be consistent with the number of spaces throughout the same file (two, unless the file already uses a different number).
```

## Docs and docstrings

> ### Tones

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Tone
```

Reviewer 3: Actually, similar to the Pebble PR, I think we should drop this section header and move the `####` to `###` to avoid too much nesting.

> #### Avoid negative, be positive

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Avoid the negative, state conditions in the positive
```

> State conditions positively as what should happen, rather than what shouldn't. Focus on desired behaviour, and frame instructions and conditions around the expected or successful outcome, not failure cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
State conditions positively: what should happen, rather than what shouldn't. Focus on desired behaviour, and frame instructions and conditions around the expected or successful outcome, not failure cases.
```

Example:

> - Avoid: "If the command doesn’t exit within 1 second, the start is considered successful." (Netagive)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Avoid: "If the command doesn’t exit within 1 second, the start is considered successful." (Negative)
```

- Prefer: "If the command stays running for the 1-second window, the start is considered successful." (Positive)

> Exceptions: Only use negative phrasing (e.g., "if X does not happen") when:

Reviewer 3: Elsewhere in this doc we say to avoid Latin abbreviations like "e.g." :-). I think we can just drop this parenthesis:
```suggestion
Exceptions: Only use negative phrasing when:
```

Please replace "e.g." with "for example" throughout.

- The failure case is the primary concern (e.g., error handling).
- The positive phrasing is awkward or less clear.

#### Avoid passive, be active

Use the active voice as much as possible.

We should only use the passive voice when we don't know or care about who performed the action.

Example:

> - Avoid: "A minimum check is created using the default values"

Reviewer 3: Should these two lines say "minimal" instead of "minimum"?

- Prefer: "We create a minimum check, using the default values"

#### Avoid subjective, be objective

> Instead of using words like "easy," "simple," or "just," which are very subjective and assume the reader's skill level, describe the action directly by stating what to do and focusing on concrete steps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Avoid using words like "easy", "simple", or "just", which are subjective and assume the reader's skill level. Instead, describe the action directly by stating what to do and focusing on concrete steps.
```

Examples:

> - Avoid: "This can be done easily using ..."
> - Prefer: "This can be done using ..."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Avoid: "This can be done easily using ..."
- Prefer: "You can do this using ..."
```

- Avoid: "This can be easily configured by ..."
- Prefer: "We can configure this using ..."

- Avoid: "Simply run the command ..."
- Prefer: "Run the command ..."

> ### Structure

Reviewer 3: Let's again avoid the additional nesting level

> #### Be short

Reviewer 3: "Be short" sounds odd. And let's merge this section into the next one, as conciseness is the same / overlaps.

```suggestion
### Be concise and avoid repetition
```

> For example, a very long introduction part of a how-to guide or a tutorial probably isn't necessary; it's good if we are writing a blog post or a book, but not so much for a tutorial/how-to guide type of doc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, avoid long introductions in a how-to guide or a tutorial. They might be appropriate if we were writing a blog post or a book, but not for documentation.
```

#### Be concise and reduce repetition

> Trim repetitive titles: Avoid repeating the name if the surrounding content already provides context.

Reviewer 3: What is "the name"? Maybe join the following "For example" paragraph with this one.

> For example, in the doc "how to use pebble", the section names can simply be "API", "CLI commands", "Features", etc., instead of "Pebble API", "Pebble CLI commands", "Pebble features".

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, in a document called "How to use Pebble", the section names can simply be "API", "CLI commands", and "Features", instead of "Pebble API", "Pebble CLI commands", and "Pebble features".
```

#### Order: alphanumeric or logical

We can either use an alphanumeric order, or a logical order, depending on the context.

Alphanumeric order is better in the case of a reference doc or a list (e.g., an Enum).

Example (Enum):

> - Prefer: `["autostart", "replan", "restart", "start", "stop"]`
> - Avoid: `["start", "stop", "restart", "replan", "autostart"]`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Prefer: autostart, replan, restart, start, stop
- Avoid: start, stop, restart, replan, autostart
```

Also, speaking of order, can we use the same order for Avoid and Prefer (Avoid first, then Prefer) throughout, like the Pebble doc?

Example (A list of commands):

> Avoid:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Avoid (arbitrary order):
```

- `pebble ls`
- `pebble mkdir`
- `pebble rm`
- `pebble push`
- `pebble pull`

> Prefer:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prefer (alphabetical order):
```

- `pebble ls`
- `pebble mkdir`
- `pebble pull`
- `pebble push`
- `pebble rm`

Exceptions:

- If there's a strong logical progression (e.g., "low", "medium", "high"; or a list of things that you should read in that particular order).
- If there is already an exception in the current documentation, follow existing conventions.

### Content

#### Use British English

[Canonical's documentation style](https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/) uses British spelling, which we try to follow here. For example: "colour" rather than "color", "labelled" rather than "labeled", "serialise" rather than "serialize", and so on.

It's a bit less clear when we're dealing with code and APIs, as those normally use US English, for example, `pytest.mark.parametrize`, and `color: #fff`.

#### Spell out abbreviations

Abbreviations and acronyms in docstrings should usually be spelled out:

- "for example" rather than "e.g."
- "that is" rather than "i.e."
- "and so on" rather than "etc"

> - "unit testing" rather than UT, and so on

Reviewer 3: Thanks for this change -- it does make it more readable!

However, it's okay to use acronyms that are very well known in our domain, like HTTP or JSON or RPC.

#### Use sentence case in headings

`## Use sentence case for headings`, instead of `## Use Title Case for Headings`.

#### Be consistent

> Be consistent in every possible way as much as possible, and stay context-consistent.

Reviewer 3: This is a funny redundant sentence "in every possible way" and "as much as possible". What about just dropping it?

Choice of words: For example, if the whole document uses "mandatory", you probably shouldn't use "required" in a newly added paragraph. For another example, if the whole doc uses "list foo" when adding new content, don't use "get a list of bar".

> Headings/lists: For example, if a doc is called "How to use Pebble", with sections "API", "CLI commands", "Health checks", and "Specification", use the heading "Environment variables" for a new section about environment variables, instead of the heading "Pebble environment variables".

Reviewer 3: This isn't needed, as we've already covered it above.

#### Be precise

Be precise in names and verbs. Use precise verbs to describe the behaviour. For example, the appropriate description of `/v1/services` is "list services", while "get a service" is probably a better fit for `/v1/services/{name}`.

> Split distinct ideas: Use separate sentences/clauses and avoid cramming. Don’t merge unrelated details (e.g., parameter format + default behaviour) into a single phrase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Split distinct ideas: Use separate sentences or clauses, and avoid cramming. Don’t merge unrelated details into a single phrase (for example, parameter format and default behaviour).
```

Example:

- Avoid: "The names of the services to get, a comma-separated string. If empty, get all services."
- Prefer: "The names of the services to get. Specify multiple times for multiple values. If omitted, the method returns all services." (In three short precise sentences we've covered what the parameter does, usage details, and behavioral details.)

Example:

> - Avoid: "For reference information about the API, see [API and clients] and [API]." (What's the difference of these two?)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Avoid: "For reference information about the API, see [API and clients] and [API]." (It's hard to tell the difference of these two.)
```

- Prefer: "For an explanation of API access levels, see [API and clients]. For the full API reference, see [API reference]." (Clear)

#### Don't over-promote

Avoid overstatement: Only use adjectives like "comprehensive", "powerful", or "robust" when the feature truly meets the description.

Example:

- Avoid: "Pebble provides a comprehensive health check feature"
- Prefer: "Pebble provides a health check feature"

Let features speak for themselves, describe actual capabilities and use measurable terms when possible (e.g., "supports 3 types of checks" instead of "versatile checking")

Future-proofing:

> - Avoid absolute terms unless permanently true

Reviewer 3: What do you mean by this? Can you give a brief example?

Author: I removed this item and added an example for the "currently" one.

> - Qualify with "currently" when describing evolving features

Reviewer 3: I actually think we should drop this. It's usually just okay to omit "currently" and have the current docs reflect the current state. Otherwise if we were consistent there'd be "currently" everywhere.

Alternatively we could give a specific example of when this would apply.

#### Avoid implementation-specific terminology

> Use generic descriptions instead of what's specific to the code. Focus on behaviour, not internal implementation: Describe what it does (e.g., "returns an error message") rather than how a particular implementation works.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Focus on behaviour, not internal implementation: Describe what it does (e.g., "returns an error message") rather than how a particular implementation works.
```

The "returns an error message" example here doesn't fit what you're talking about very well. Can we find a clearer one?

Example:

- Avoid: "`Change.Err` will be non-empty if the change had an error." (Code-specific)
- Prefer: "The `err` field in the response will contain an error message if the operation failed." (General)

Exception: If documenting a client library (e.g., Go/Python SDKs), implementation details are appropriate.

#### Articles

> "a" or "the", generic or specific, choose carefully. When describing generic parameters or behavior:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Choose between the "a" or "the" articles carefully.
```

- Avoid: "The format of the duration string is a sequence of decimal numbers"
- Prefer: "The format of a duration string is a sequence of decimal numbers." (Describing a generic parameter, not a specific one.)

- Avoid: "Restart the service when the health check fails."
- Prefer: "Restart a service when the health check fails." (When describing a generic behaviour, no specific service is implied.)

### Code blocks

- Consistency: the styles of code blocks and terminal output samples should be the same, at least within the same document.
- Preferred style: Use `{code-block}` when showing files. Use `{terminal}` (`.rst` style) when showing commands or terminal output. Avoid using `{code-block}` for commands or terminal output, unless it's consistent with the existing content in the same document.

> - Highlighting: Use `:emphasize-lines: 8-10` with `{code-block}` for highlighting lines in files when necessary. Don't add an inconsistent `{code-block}` so that you can highlight lines in commands or terminal output. Instead, use `{terminal}` along with helpful words and comments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Highlighting: Use `:emphasize-lines: 8-10` with `{code-block}` for highlighting lines in files when necessary. Don't add an inconsistent `{code-block}` just so that you can highlight lines in commands or terminal output. Instead, use `{terminal}` along with helpful words and comments.
```

### YAML

> - Types: Handle strings and integers carefully. For example, if the field "change" is a string in the code, use `change: "1"` in the YAML example, not `change: 1`.

Reviewer 3: This is more of a code review point, not a style guide thing. I think we should drop it.

It's a bit less clear when we're dealing with code and APIs, as those normally use US English, for example, `pytest.mark.parametrize`, and `color: #fff`.

> See more doc style guide [here](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/blob/master/STYLE.md#docs-and-docstrings).

Reviewer: It might be more obvious to put this at the top of the "Docs and docstrings" section - something like:

```
## Docs and docstrings

See the [Pebble doc style guide](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/blob/master/STYLE.md#docs-and-docstrings).

### Use British English
...
```
